v0.45 Changelog: Rest of Improvements (#9404)
PennyLaneAI/pennylane: doc/releases/changelog-0.45.0.md

<h4>Disentangling Transforms 🧶</h4>

* The :func:`~.transforms.disentangle_cnot` and :func:`~.transforms.disentangle_swap` are now
  callable from PennyLane, not just from Catalyst's ``passes`` module. These compilation passes
  simplify rendundant ``CNOT`` and ``SWAP`` gates.
  [(#9133)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9133)

  .. note::

    The :func:`~.transforms.disentangle_cnot` and :func:`~.transforms.disentangle_swap` are

>     compilation passes that are only compatible with :func:`~.qjit` workflows.

Reviewer: Should we make a distinction between  `qjit` workflows that require `capture=True` (like in this example) and those that do not rely on capture?
I think the answer is No, because which pathway is being used to integrate with Catalyst seems like an internal detail; but just wondering

Author: Both of these transforms should work with either frontend (program capture on/off) :). So no need to worry about that here. I just showed a code example with capture enabled because that's the preferred pathway 😁

>   Both compilation passes are meant to recognize patterns that include ``CNOT`` and ``SWAP`` gates

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Both compilation passes are designed to recognize patterns that include ``CNOT`` and ``SWAP`` gates
```

  that are redundant. In the case of :func:`~.transforms.disentangle_cnot`, ``CNOT`` gates are

>   replaced when the control wire is preceded by an ``X`` gate (the control wire is guaranteed to be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  replaced when the control wire is preceded by an ``X`` gate (and the control wire is guaranteed to be
```

  in the :math:`\vert 1 \rangle` state). This is illustrated in the example below, where no ``CNOT``
  gates remain after the compilation pass is applied.

  ```python
  import pennylane as qp

  dev = qp.device("lightning.qubit", wires=2)

  @qp.qjit(capture=True)
  @qp.transforms.disentangle_cnot
  @qp.qnode(dev)
  def circuit():
      qp.X(0)
      qp.CNOT([0, 1])
      return qp.state()
  ```

  ```pycon
  >>> print(qp.specs(circuit, level=1)().resources.gate_counts)
  {'PauliX': 2}
  ```

<h4>Drawing ✏️</h4>

* The :func:`~.draw_graph` function is now accessible from PennyLane, not just from Catalyst. This

>   function allows for compact graphical inspection of ``qjit``-compiled circuits by preserving

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  function allows for compact graphical inspection of ``qjit``-compiled circuits, preserving
```

  a QNode when program capture is turned on.
  [(#9072)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9072)

* ``qp.cond`` converts non-boolean predicates to boolean immediately during capture time instead of
  ``from_plxpr`` doing this, allowing for easier maintenance and organization of ``from_plxpr``.
  [(#9336)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9336)

* ``qp.for_loop`` with negative step sizes is now handled immediately during capture time instead of
  handling this within ``from_plxpr``, allowing for easier maintenance and organization of
  ``from_plxpr``.
  [(#9299)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9299)

* With program capture, dynamic-shaped arrays returned from ``qp.for_loop`` and ``qp.while_loop``
  can now be combined with other dynamic-shaped arrays returned from ``qp.for_loop`` and
  ``qp.while_loop``.
  [(#9245)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9245)

* ``qp.vjp`` and ``qp.jvp`` are now compatible with program capture.
  [(#8736)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/8736)
  [(#8788)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/8788)
  [(#9019)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9019)

> * A ``qp.capture.subroutine`` has been added for jitting quantum subroutines with program capture.

Reviewer: A suggestion with capital s, feel free to disregard
move this entry to the Internals section (where other subroutines work is located) and include part of the example that Christina added to the capture/subroutine module:

```
qp.capture.enable()

@qp.capture.subroutine
def f(x, wires):
    qp.RX(x, wires)

@qp.qnode(qp.device('lightning.qubit', wires=5))
def c(x : float):
    f(x, 0)
    f(x, 1)
    return qp.state()
...

If we create a ``qjit`` version of the QNode, we can inspect the mlir and see a ``FuncOp`` that is
    reused for both calls:

    >>> qjit_c = qml.qjit(c)
    >>> print(qjit_c.mlir[1010:1300]) # doctest: +SKIP
    %0 = quantum.alloc( 5) : !quantum.reg
    %1 = call @f(%0, %arg0, %c_0) : (!quantum.reg, tensor<f64>, tensor<i64>) -> !quantum.reg
    %2 = call @f(%1, %arg0, %c) : (!quantum.reg, tensor<f64>, tensor<i64>) -> !quantum.reg
    %3 = quantum.compbasis qreg %2 : !quantum.obs
...
```

Author: @gabrielasd good idea!

  [(#8912)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/8912)

* ``qp.counts`` of mid-circuit measurement results is now compatible with program capture.
  [(#9022)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9022)

* Program capture support for ``StatePrep`` and ``BasisState`` has been enhanced to accept ``state``
  arguments of ``list`` or ``tuple`` types.
  [(#9338)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9338)

<h4>Catalyst Compatibility 🤝</h4>

> * ``BasisEmbedding`` is now captured as ``BasisState`` so that it works with Catalyst and program

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ``BasisEmbedding`` is now captured as ``BasisState`` for compatibility with Catalyst and program
```

  capture.

>   [(#9183)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9183)

Reviewer: just a suggestion, if you think its worth it, to illustrate with an example:
```
>>> jaxpr = jax.make_jaxpr(qp.BasisEmbedding)(np.array([1, 1, 1]), wires=(0, 1, 2))
>>> jaxpr
{ lambda ; a:i64[3] b:i64[] c:i64[] d:i64[]. let
    e:AbstractOperator() = BasisState[n_wires=3] a b c d
  in (e,) }
```
